In the Pāli Buddhist exegesis we also find a number of critical observations made in respect of non-Buddhist schools of Indian phi-losophy as well. However, it is mostly the doctrinal tenets of the Sāṃkhya and the Vaiśeṣika systems that attracted the special attention of the Pāli exegetes. The Sāṃkhya is referred to as Kāpilā, the followers of Kapila, the founder of the system, and also as Pakativādino, the Exponents of Primordial Nature, because in their view what is called prakṛti (Pāli: pakati) is the ultimate causal nexus of the world of non-self.23 The Vaiśeṣika is referred to as the theory of Kaṇāda, because he was the founder of this school.24 However, in the pre-commentarial Milindapañha we find Sankhyā and Visesikā used in referring to these two schools.25
As we shall see in detail, the dhamma theory provides the onto-logical foundation for the Abhidhamma philosophy: Briefly stated it means the resolution of the world of experience into a number of ba-sic factors called dhammas, together with an explanation as to their inter- connection and interdependence on the basis of conditional relations. One misconception that has gained currency about this theory is that it amounts to some kind of pluralism. As we have shown in detail in the first chapter, the dhamma theory is based not only on analysis (bheda) but on synthesis (saṅgaha) as well. Analysis, when overemphasized, leads to pluralism. Synthesis, when over-emphasized, leads to monism. What we find in the 上座部 Abhidhamma is a combination of both. This hasenabled it to transcend the binary opposition between pluralism (sabbaṃ puthuttaṃ) and monism (sabbaṃ ekattaṃ), or as one Pāli commentary says, the bi-nary opposition between the principle of plurality (nānatta-naya) and the principle of unity (ekatta-naya).26
As to the two complementary methods of analysis and synthesis, It is necessary to make one observation here. It is that the 说一切有部 overemphasized the analytical method. This led to their theory of tritemporality (trai-kālya) according to which the substance of the dharmas persists in the three divisions of time, fu-ture, present, and past. What we should not overlook here is that even the very expression, sabbatthivāda (sarvāstivāda) by which this school is known amounts to an admission by it of the notion of “sabbaṃ atthi” (all exists). “All exists” (sabbaṃ atthi), it should be noted here, is one of the four extremist philosophical positions men-tioned in the Pāli suttas — the position of extreme realism. Its polar opposite is “nothing exists” (sabbaṃ natthi), which is the Buddhist expression for extreme nihilism. As explicitly stated in the Pāli suttas, the Buddha keeps equally aloof from all such extremist positions through his doctrine of dependent origination.27 
Another issue that requires our attention here concerns the relationship between the dhamma theory and the concept of emptiness (suññata). For this purpose it is necessary to clarify here what exactly Pāli Buddhism means by emptiness. In the words of the Buddha as recorded in a Pāli sutta, the world is empty in the sense that it is empty of a self or of anything pertaining to a self (attena vā attaniyena vā suññaṃ).28 Here the world means the world of experience, the only world that Buddhism recognizes. And it is precisely this world that early Buddhism analyses into five khandhas (aggregates), twelve āyatanas (bases of cognition), and eighteen dhātus (elements of cognition), and which the Abhidhamma analyses into eighty-one (conditioned) dhammas. What all this amounts to saying is that the khandhas, āyatanas, and dhātus as well as the dhammas are all empty of a self or of anything pertaining to a self. Thus “empty” and “non- self” become mutually convertible expressions: what is empty is non-self, and likewise, what is non-self is empty. Therefore, from the 上座部 perspective we are at full liberty to restate the well-known statement, sabbe dhammā anattā (all dhammas are non-self), which is common to both early Buddhism and the 上座部 Abhidhamma, as sabbe dhammā suññā (all dhammas are empty).
It is of course true that each dhamma, both mental and material, is defined as “own-nature” (sabhāva).29 However, what we need to remember here is that this so called “own-nature” arises and exists in dependence on a multiplicity of impermanent conditions. As the Pāli commentaries clarify this, strictly speaking, a dhamma is not “that which bears its own-nature”, but “what is being borne by its own conditions”.30 In this connection it is also observed that “own- nature” (sabhāva) does not mean “own-sway” (vasavattitā).31 It will thus be seen that although the term sabhāva is used as a syn-onym for dhamma, it is interpreted in such a way that it means the very absence of sabhāva in any sense that implies a substantial mode of being. In other words, none of the dhammas is a self-entity (atta) or anything pertaining to a self-entity (attaniyena). It is in this sense that we need to understand why the dhammas are “empty” (suñña). Of equal significance is the distinction drawn between two truths, the consensual (sammuti) and the ultimate (paramattha). In almost all other Buddhist schools one truth is considered higher and the other lower than the other. Their very use of the term saṃvṛti for the relative truth clearly indicates this. For saṃvṛti means, not that which reveals, but that which conceals. For the 上座部, on the other hand, there is no hierarchical difference between the two, de-spite the fact that one is called conventional and the other ultimate. This situation is, in fact, fully consonant with the distinction drawn in the Pāli suttas between nītattha, a statement whose meaning is already drawn out, and neyyattha, a statement whose meaning has to be drawn out.32
It is to this twofold distinction that most Buddhist schools trace their double truth. However, it must be emphasized here that the relevant sutta passage does not say that one statement is higher or lower than the other. All it says is that a nītattha-statement should not be understood as a neyyattha-statement and vice versa. One who disregards this distinction, the sutta goes on to say, misrepre-sents the Tathāgata.33 Referring to these two statements, F. Ed-gerton observes: “In Pāli neither is ipso facto preferred to the other; one errs only in interpreting one as if it were the other.”34 He fur-ther observes that in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit literature “a nītārtha text ... is recommended as a guide in preference to one that is neyārtha."35
Here, it is worth noting the well-known saying that the Dhamma is a means to an end and not an end in itself. As an extension of this idea, it came to be recognized that the Dhamma as a means can be presented in many different ways, from many different perspectives. As recorded in the Bahuvedanīya Sutta of the Majjhimanikāya when two disciples of the Buddha, a monk and a layman, had an unstoppa-ble argument as to the number of feelings, Ānanda reported this matter to the Buddha. Then the Buddha told Ānanda that both of them were correct, because they looked at the issue from two dif-ferent perspectives. In this connection the Buddha told Ānanda that he had presented feelings not only as two or three, but also as five, six, eighteen, thirty-six, and one hundred and eight.36 It was on this occasion that the Buddha told Ānanda: pariyāya-desito ayaṃ Ānanda mayā dhammo.37 What this means is that the Dhamma has been presented in many different ways, from many different perspectives (aneka- pariyāyena). The clear message conveyed here is that what accords with actuality, and therefore what is true, can be re-stated from many different perspectives, and needs not be repeated in the same way as a holy hymn or a mantra.
The Dhamma, it may be noted here, is not actuality as such, but a description of actuality It is a conceptual model which describes the nature of actuality through a series of propositions. We find this idea formally expressed in a Pāli commentary: paññattiṃ anatik-kamma paramattho pakāsito.38 That is, it is by not going beyond paññatti that the nature of actuality has been presented. Here the term paññatti means both word (nāma-paññatti) and meaning (at-tha-paññatti).39 Therefore, what this means is that the nature of actuality has been presented within a conceptual framework through the symbolic medium of language. Thus we see that here, as else-where, Buddhism avoids absolutism. There is no one absolutist way of presenting the Dhamma which is valid for all times and climes.
There could be more than one conceptual model encapsulating the nature of actuality. The validity of each will be determined by its ability to take us to the goal, i.e., from bondage to freedom, from ignorance to wisdom, from our present predicament to final eman-cipation. In this connection it is instructive to note here that the Pāli suttas themselves give us a clear indication as to how we should dis-tinguish the Dhamma from what is not the Dhamma. It is that what-ever leads to the cessation of passion (rāga), aversion (dosa), and delusion (moha) is the Dhamma and that whatever leads away from it is not the Dhamma. Thus the criterion is not textual although of course it occurs in the Buddhist texts.
That the Dhamma has been presented from many different perspectives can be seen from the Pāli suttas themselves. To give one example: the Noble Truth of Suffering is usually defined as: Birth is suffering, decay is suffering, and so on until we come to the last item: “in brief, the five aggregates of grasping are suffering”, How-ever, in one passage in the Samyurranikāya where the Four Truths are formally presented, we find the First Truth defined as “the five aggregates of grasping” “ Here the last item in the usual definition of suffering, the one that is most comprehensive, is presented as the meaning of suffering.
What we need to remember here is that “the five aggregates of grasping” is a different way of referring to individual existence in its saṃsāric dimension. Individual existence, from the Buddhist pers-pective, is an impersonal congeries of dependently arising psycho- physical factors which we grasp as “this is mine” (etaṃ mama), “this I am" (eso’ ham asmi), and “this is my self” (eso me attā). But what we grasp in this manner is constantly changing (anicca) and there-fore not under our full control (anattā). This is what Buddhism means by the suffering at the very core of our existence (saṅkhāra-dukkha).41
Thus it is not the five aggregates but the five ageregates of grasping that become a source of suffering. If “the five aggregates of grasping” is another expression for life in saṃsāra, then it can be concluded that what Buddhism is saying is not simply that there is suffering in saṃsāric life, but that saṃsāric life itself is suffering. What we should not overlook here is that by “suffering” Buddhism means conditioned experience, any experience dependent on im-permanent conditions. Any conditioned experience, whether it is ex-tremely pleasant or  otherwise, is suffering because of its depen-dent nature. This should explain why even jhāna-experience, which represents higher levels of mind's unification and therefore higher levels of happiness, is also brought under suffering. For, in the final analysis, even jhana- experience is impermanent and, therefore, conditioned.42 As a matter of fact, Buddhism does not deny the possibility of sensual indulgence and sensual pleasure (kāmasukhallikānuyoga) as is very well shown by Buddhism’s refer-ence to it as one of the two extremist practices that should be avoided. What Buddhism questions is not its impossibility but its va-lidity as a means to emancipation.
There are other examples of presenting the Dhamma in differ-ent perspectives. For instance, in the Saṃyuttanikāya one who has entered the stream (sotāpanna) is described in more than one way.43 In the same nikāya we also find the path leading to the unconditioned (Nibbāna) described in eleven different ways.44  One purpose of referring to these examples is this. By taking these and other similar cases into consideration we should not hasten to con-clude that they represent different historical stages in the devel-opment of Buddhist thought, unless of course there is clear evidence to the contrary. Rather, they should be understood in the light of the statement that the Dhamma can be presented from different pers-pectives.
It is in the light of these observations that we need to under-stand the significance of the commentarial statement, namely, that the Buddha sometimes teaches the Dhamma according to conven-tional truth, sometimes according to ultimate truth, and sometimes through a combination of both.45 As one Pāli commentary says it is like a teacher choosing different dialects to teach his pupils who speak different dialects.46 There is absolutely no implication here that one dialect is either higher or lower than another.
Closely associated with the distinction drawn between two truths is the development by the Abhidhamma of a logical apparatus for defining the dhammas. The first is called agent-denotation (kat-tu-sādhana), the second instrument-denotation (karaṇa-sādhana), the third object-denotation (kamma-sādhana), the fourth loca-tive-denotation (adhikaraṇa-sādhana), and the fifth na-ture-denotation (bhāva-sādhana). Their implications in the context of the dhamma theory will become clear from the chapters that fol-low. However, it is necessary to focus our attention on the first. Here, what is sought to be defined occurs in the nominative case. It exactly corresponds to what we call today the subject-predicate sentence. One example given is: cognition cognizes (viññāṇaṃ vijānāti).47 This kind of definition, it is said, is made by superim-posing a distinction on where there is no such distinction (abhede bheda-parikappanā).48 Such a superimposition creates a distinction between the agent and the action. For this very reason the Abhidhamma says that this kind of definition is tentative and provisional and not valid in an ultimate sense (nippariyāyena).49 It is resorted to only as an aid to understanding. Thus all such innocent- looking sentences as: “I see”, “My eyes see”, “I see with my eyes”, “Eye-consciousness sees” are not valid in an ultimate sense. To make them valid we have to rephrase them in the language of cau-sality. When so rephrased, they all mean: “Depending on the eye and the eye-object arises eye-consciousness". When we say, “It happened,” or “It occurred,” from the Buddhist perspective we mean, “there was a happening,” “there was an occurrencing.”
In point of fact, this is not an Abhidhamma innovation. We find this idea expressed in the Pāli suttas as well. When a monk asked the Buddha, “Who is it, Venerable Sir, that feels”, the Buddha rep-lied: “It is not a fit question (na kallo pañho). I am not saying (someone) feels. If I were saying so, the question would be a fit one. But I am not saying that. If you were to ask thus: Conditioned by what, Venerable Sir, does feeling arise, then the proper answer would be: Conditioned by sensory contact, feeling arises.”50 As will be noticed, what made the Ābhidhammikas evolve this system of definition is their awareness that the structure of actuality does not exactly correspond to the structure of language. We tend to be-lieve that there is an ontological subject corresponding to the grammatical subject. Language is also based on the recognition of a dichotomy between substance and quality (ādhāra-ādheya). This dichotomy, as one Pāli says, is usually expressed through what is called the genitive expression (sāmi-vacana),51 as for example, the colour of the rainbow. Buddhist philosophy of almost all schools be-gins with the abolition of this distinction.
Another important aspect of the 上座部 Abhidhamma con-cerns paññatti, the category of the nominal and the conceptual. Ac-cording to the dhamma theory, only the dhammas are real; all things besides the dhammas are conceptual constructs, or logical abstrac-tions with no objective counterparts. However, there surfaced a trend in certain Buddhist schools towards reversing this process by way of reification. Thus as recorded in the 论事, some Budd-hist schools maintained that “there is an immutable something called thus-ness in the very nature of things, material or otherwise”, which is unconditioned.
Thus distinct from matter, there is materiality of matter (rūpassa rūpatā), distinct from feeling, there is feeling-ness of feel-ing (vedanāya vedanatā) and so forth.52 Some other Buddhist schools elevated the principle of dependent origination to the level of an unconditioned entity.53
The 上座部 held that this process of reification overstepped the bounds of paññatti (paññattiṃ atidhāvitvā gaṇhanti).54 As one Pāli commentary says in this regard, there is no separate entity called dependent origination distinct from the factors that arise in dependence on other factors.55 The same is true, for example, of impermanence. There is no separate entity called impermanence ad-ditional to what is subject to impermanence. If it were otherwise, so runs the argument, then this impermanence would require another impermanence to make it impermanent, and this in turn would re-quire still another, thus resultingin a process of interminability (anupaccheda) or infinite regress (anavaṭṭhāna).56
In the Appendix to this work there is a discussion on why the 上座部 came to be known as 分别说部, “Doctrine of Analysis.” This designation, it seems to us, has to be understood in the context of the doctrinal controversy between the 上座部者 and the 说一切有部 on the tritemporality (trai-kālya) of the dharmas. In the course of this discussion an attempt will be made to show that the Third Buddhist Council was an historical event and not “a pious fabrication” on the part of the 上座部 Buddhist historiography. At the early stages of Buddhist academic studies, it was thought by some scholars that the name of 目犍连长老 (目犍连子·帝须) who, according to 上座部 tradition, presided at the Third Buddhist Council, occurs only in the commentaries and chroni-cles compiled in Sri Lanka. However, as pointed out by Louis de La Vallée Poussin, the Venerable Elder's name occurs in the Chinese version of the Vijñānakāya, one of the seven books of the 说一切有部 Abhidharma Piṭaka.57 As he has pointed out further, the first chapter of this 说一切有部 work is named after 目犍连长老 as Maudgalyāyana-Skandhaka, because its sole purpose is to refute from the 说一切有部 perspective the evidence adduced by the Theravādin Elder against the theory of tri-temporality.58 In point of fact, in the sixth chapter of the 论事, which is said to have been compiled at 第三次结集 by the Theravādin Elder, we find a criticism of the 说一切有部 theory from the 上座部 perspective.


Strangely enough the two terms theravāda and vibhajjavāda occur in the Pāli suttas which were compiled long before there emerged a school of Buddhist thought that came to be known by these two terms. We find the term theravāda in the Pāli sutras which relate the bodhisatta's meeting with Ālāra the Kālāma and Uddaka the son of Rāma. After having learned the teaching imparted by them the bodhisatta declared his mastery of their teaching by using the two words ñāṇavāda and theravāda.1 Obviously in this particular context the term theravāda does not occur in the sense of “Doctrine of the Elders”. It occurs in a sense which according to its commentarial gloss means “profession of certainty of conviction” (theravādan ti thirabhāva-vādaṃ).2 In the same way the other word ñāṇavāda which occurs together with theravāda means “profession of knowledge” (ñāṇavādan ti jānāmt ti vādaṃ). Here, both terms are used to emphasize the bodhisatta's thorough grasp of what was taught by Ālāra the Kālāma and Uddaka the son of Rāma.
On the other hand, the term vibhajjavāda occurs in a more technical sense to mean a qualifed answer, an analytical explanation, or a statement of conditional assertion. It is often contrasted with ekamsavāda which means an unqualified answer, or a categorical statement either in the affirmative or in the negative.* But as another name for 上座部 what does 分别说部 really mean? Under what historical circumstances, due to what doctrinal reasons, if any, and in which period in the history of Buddhist thought did these two terms become mutually convertible?
Now the identification of 上座部 with 分别说部 can be traced to the traditional accounts of the Third Buddhist Council as presented in the Mahavaṃsa and the two commentaries to the Vinaya and the 论事, and not to its earlier version as recorded in the Dīpavaṃsa.4 The accounts given in the three works, mentioned first, are more or less the same in content and are couched in more or less the same language. They all begin with a continuous narration of a series of episodes culminating in the main event. This involves a detailed account of the life of the 目犍连子·帝须长老 who presided at the Council, the conversion of King Asoka to Buddhism, his many acts of beneficence and lavish gifts to the Saṅgha, the entry into the Dispensation (sāsana) of heretics who masqueraded as Buddhist monks declaring their own doctrines as the true Word of the Buddha, the postponement of the Uposatha ceremony for a period of six years because of the heretics within the Sarigha, the kings abortive attempt at reconciliation through his minister Mahādeva, the remorse felt by the king over this act, his meeting with the 目犍连子·帝须长老 who declares that the king has no moral responsibility over this act, and the Thera's instruction to the king on the teaching of the Buddha for seven consecutive days at the Royal Park.
On the seventh day the King Asoka had the community of monls assembled at Asokārāma. He got an enclosure of screens prepared and took his seat within this enclosure. Getting the monks to group themselves according to the divergent views they professed, the King summoned each group of monks in turn and asked this question: “What was the Perfectly Enlightened One a teacher of' (Kiṃvādī Sammā Sambuddho). In response to this question those who believed in eternalism replied that the Buddha was an advocate of eternalism. Those who believed in qualified eternalism replied that the Buddha was an advocate of qualified eternalism. Likewise those who propounded theories of finiteness and infinitude, the eel-wrigglers, casuits, those who professed theories of conscious existence, non-conscious existence, neither conscious nor non-conscious existence, annihilationists and those who professed Nibbāna of this life also replied according to the views they held. It was not difficult for the King who had already learnt the Dhamma to realize that they were not Buddhist monks but heretics who belonged to other persuasions. The King gave them white garments and expelled all of them, numbering 60000 in all, from the community of monks. Next the King summoned the remaining monks and asked the same question: “What was the Perfectly Enlightened One a teacher of?' They said in reply, “Great King, He was Vibhajjavādī ". Being replied so, the King in order to get this confirmed asked the 目犍连子·帝须长老, “Was the Perfecily Enlightened One Vibhajjavādī. “Yes, Great King, replied the Thera. Thereupon King Asoka told 目犍连子·帝须长老, “Venerable Sir, the Dispensation is now pure, let the fraternity of monks perform the Uposatha.' At this assembly, numbering 60000 monks, the 目犍连子·帝须长老 recited the treatise called 论事 in order to refute the heretical views. Even as the Elders, Kassapa the Senior and Yasa the son of Kākandaka, rehearsed the Dhamma and Vinaya, he, too, selected thousand monks from those numbering 60,000, who were well versed in the learning of the Threefold Knowledge and rehearsed the Dhamma and Vinaya. Thus rehearsing the Dhamma and Vinaya, he purified the Dispensation of all stains and held 第三次结集.5
It will be seen that the most important, in fact the very pivotal, word in this account is vibhajjavādī which we have left un-translated. A proper interpretation of this word will not only show why the 上座部 came to be called 分别说部 but would also shed much light on the actual causes that led to 第三次结集.
The first-ever rendering of vibhajjavāda into English could perhaps be traced to George Turnour' translation of the Mahāvaṃsa (1868), where we find it rendered as “the religion of investigated truth”.6 In his A Dictionary of the Pāli Language (1875) R. C. Child-ers explained the term as “Religion of Logic or Reason”. In this con-nection Childers also took into consideration its earlier rendering into English by George Turnour, for he observes that this latter rendering is not inappropriate.7 One of the earliest to endorse Childers' interpretation was Wilhelm Geiger who, in his Mahāvaṃsa translation, observes that it renders the sense of the term very appropriately.8 Since then we find this interpretation being recognized and sometimes developed upon to mean that the Buddha always followed the analytical method and therefore Buddhism could rightly be called a doctrine of analysis.9
In this appendix we propose to show that this particular interpretation of the term 分别说部, when it stands as another name for 上座部, does not appear to be corroborated either by textual evidence or by historical data. Its fallacy, it seems to us, stems from its failure to take into consideration the textual and the doctrinal context in which this term assumes its significance. For the term does not lend itself to a correct interpretation when it is sought to be explained in isolation from its proper frame of reference.
As already noted, we can trace the reasons that led to the use of the term 分别说部 as another expression for 上座部 to the traditional account of 第三次结集. It is strange, however, that a word of such significance should have been left unexplained in the works where this account occurs. This situation is perhaps responsible for there being more than one explanation in the Pāli sub-commentaries as to why the Buddha is vibhajjavādī. The sub-commentary to the Mahāvaṃsa explains it as: “[The Buddha is] vibhajjavādī because he analyses [the individual being] into aggregates” (khandhānaṃ vibhajjakattā vibhajjavādī).10 We are not sure whether this refers to the analysis of the individual being into aggregates or to the analysis of the aggregates, in turn, into dhammas, the basic factors of empirical reality as presented in the Abhidhamma. In whichever way we interpret it, it is on the importance of analysis that the emphasis is laid.
It is of course true that analysis plays an important role in the Buddhist teachings both of the Pāli surras and of the Abhidhamma. However, īt is equally true that no less important a role is played by synthesis as well. If the early Buddhist teachings on the khandhas, āyatanas and dhatus and the Abhidhamma teaching on the dhammas represent the analytical aspect of Buddhism, the Buddhist principles of causality and conditionality highlight the importance attached to synthesis. Let us also recall here that the dhamma theory of the Abhidhamma is based not only on analysis (bheda) but on synthesis (saṅgaha) as well. Therefore to represent Buddhism as a doctrine of analysis is to overlook the importance attached to synthesis in the Buddhist methodology.
The Sāratthadīpanī, a Vinaya subcommentary, says that the Buddha is called vibhajjavādī because he follows the method of qualified explanation whereby he is able to avoid such extremist views as eternalism and annihilationism.11 On the other hand, according to Vimativinodanī, another subcommentary to the Vinaya, the Buddha is “ekanta-vibhajjasīla”.12 This seems to suggest that the Buddha always maintains the vibhajjavāda standpoint. Both explanations, it seems to us, fail to give a satisfactory explanation for the presence in the discourses of the Buddha of categorical statements (ekaṃsavāda) as well.
This whole situation will become clear if we refer here to the well-known Buddhist classification of questions into four groups, which is as follows:
1. pañho ekaṃsa-vyākaraṇīyo, a question which should be answered categorically, either in the affirmative or in the negative.
2. pañho vibhajja-vyākaraṇīyo, a question which should be answered analytically, in other words, a question to which a qualified answer should be given.
3. pañho paṭipucchā-vyākaraṇīyo, a question which should be answered by raising a counter-question, the need for the counter-question being due to the ambiguities in the original question.
4. pañho ṭhapanīyo, a question which should be set aside, a question to which no answer should be given.
It will be seen that the four kinds of question imply four corresponding kinds of answer as well. It will also be seen that among them one kind of answer is not considered superior or inferior to any other kind of answer. The sequence of their enumeration does not in any way imply a theory as to their degrees of validity. Each kind of answer, when apposite, is equally valid and equally commendable. What determines the validity of the answer is whether it belongs to the same class to which the question belongs. Hence the Buddha says that a person who does not answer categorically a question which ought to be answered categorically, who does not answer analytically a question which ought to be answered analytically, who does not answer with a counter-question a question which ought to be answered by raising a counter-question, and who does not set aside a question which ought to be set aside — such a person is indeed not fit to discuss with (akaccha).13
It is in conformity with this situation that we find in the Pāli suttas statements which can be cited as examples for all the four modes of explanation. A typical example of an ekaṃsavādī or categorical statement is the recurrent formula: sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā (all conditioned phenomena are impermanent), or: sabbe dhammā anatttā (all things are devoid of a self-entity).
Before we come to the second kind of question, let us take the third and the fourth. A good example for the third is the answer given by the Buddha to the question whether consciousness is one thing and the soul another. Before the Buddha answers it he raises a counter-question in order to clarify what the interlocutor takes to be the soul.14 The best example for the fourth category is the Buddhas setting aside of ten questions without providing answers to them. These relate to whether the world is finite or not in terms of time and space, whether the life- principle and the physical body are identical or not, and whether the Tathāgata, the one who has gained emancipation, exists after death, or does not exist, or both exists and does not exist, or neither exists nor non-exists.
Now let us take the second mode of explanation in the four-fold classification, which we postponed to be considered last. This refers to questions to which qualifed or analytical answers/explanations should be given. An example for this is found in the Subha Sutta of the Majjhimanikāya which records a conversation between the Buddha and Subha, the young man. When Subha asks the Buddha for his opinion on the proposition that it is a house-holder and not a recluse who would succeed in obtaining what is right, just, and good, the Buddha says in reply: Vibhajjavādo'ham ettha māṇava, nāham ettha ekaṃsavādo. That is: “Here (ettha), O young man, I give an analytical explanation; I do not make here (ettha) a categorical assertion”.15 For, as the Buddha says, fhe answer to the question raised by Subha depends, not on whether the person is a layman or a monk, but on the person's conduct, whether the conduct is good or bad. It will be seen that the use of the adverbial form ettha in the answer given by the Buddha is of great significance. It means “here””, “herein”, “in this respect”, or to be more precise, “in relation to the question raised by Subha”. Its significance lies in the fact that it clearly indicates the specific context in which the Buddha gives his answer following the vibhajjavāda method. If we were to overlook this context-indicating term ettha, as is sometimes done,16 it would give the incorrect impression that the Buddha always follows vibhajjavāda in preference to ekaṃsavāda; in other words, that he endorses only analytical statements and not universal propositions. But the use of the term ettha prevents us from drawing such a conclusion.
Another instance of the Buddha following the vibhajjavāda mode of explanation is recorded in the 增支部: Gārayhaṃ kho bhante Bhagavā garahati pāsaṃsiyaṃ pasaṃsati. Gārayhaṃ kho bhante Bhagavā garahanto pāsaṃsiyaṃ pasaṃsanto vibhajjavādo Bhagavā. Na so Bhagavā ettha ekaṃsavādo.17 That is: “Sir, the Blessed One blames what is blamable, praises what is praiseworthy. Sir, by blaming what is blamable and praising what is praiseworthy, the Blessed One speaks after analysing. Here, the Blessed One does not speak categorically”. It is this quotation, more than the one already referred to, which is often cited in modern writings to show that the Buddha is always an advocate of the vibhajjavāda mode of explanation and therefore that the term vibhajjavāda could rightly be used as another expression for early Buddhism. Such a conclusion does not follow because of the simple reason that although the context-indicating term ettha does not occur immediately before or after the words, Vibhajjavādo Bhagavā, it does certainly occur in the last sentence of the quotation: Na so Bhagavā ettha ekaṃsavādo. Here, too, the use of the term ettha is intended to show that if the Buddha does not make a categorical assertion on this issue it is because the context does not warrant it. Again the clear implication is that the Buddha resorts to both vibhajjavāda (non-categorical) and ekaṃsavāda (categorical) modes of explanation.
It is in consonance with this situation that when Poṭṭhapāda, the wandering ascetic, tells the Buddha, “We do not know of any categorical doctrines preached by the Buddha", the Buddha in reply says, “I have taught and laid down doctrines of which it is possible to make categorical assertions and I have taught and laid down doctrines of which it is not possible to make categorical assertions”.18 Thus the truth of the matter is that according to Buddhism a categorical statement is no less valid, or no less logical than an analytical statement just because it is categorical. Likewise an analytical statement is no less valid, or no less logical than a categorical statement just because it is analytical. What matters is not whether a given statement is categorical or analytical but the context in relation to which the statement is made. It follows therefore that vibhajjavāda which refers to analytical or qualified explanations has no special claim to be more logical or rational than ekaṃsavāda which refers to categorical statements. Therefore on the basis of early Buddhist discourses it is not possible to support the view that the use of the term vibhajjavāda is intended to show that Buddhism endorses only analysis and that by extension this means Buddhism is the religion of analysis.
Now this situation which we have just clarified poses an important problem in relation to the traditional account of 第三次结集 to which we have already referred. It may be recalled here that in this account it is maintained that the Buddha is Vibhajjavādī without in any way qualifying this statement, in other words, without specifying the relevant context. It, therefore, gives the impression that the Buddha always maintained the vibhajjavāda standpoint. Clearly this is at Variance with the situation that obtains in the early Buddhist texts, where, as we have noticed, no such claim is made. It is very unlikely that in the account of the Council the term vibhajjavādī is used in a different sense either. How then are we to reconcile these two situations is the question that arises here.
As an ansvwer to this question Mrs Rhys Davids suggests that although each kind of explanation is, “when apposite, equally commendable, yet it is easy to discern that whether established generalizations were being atraigned by criticism or whethber as in the Asokan age errors arising from uncritical interpretations of doctrine were to be expunged, the path to purity of views and the hallmark of sagacious exposition lay chiefly in the distinguo or the vibhajjavāda method of explanation”.19 However, as Mrs Rhys Davids herself observes a universal predication (ekaṃsavāda) is no less logical than an analytical statement (vibhjjavāda).20 Hence this gives rise to the question why only the vibhajjavāda standpoint should have been singled out as the hallmark of sagacious exposition.
It is of course not impossible to give a broad interpretation to the term vibhajjavāda so as to include within it all the four modes of explanation. For it may be argued, although this argument may appear rather ingenious, that when one is asked for his opinion on a proposition, the most rational position he should take up before he gives his own explanation is to make a preliminary analysis of the proposition so as to find out to which of the four categories it belongs. Since this preliminary exercise involves the vibhajjavāda methodology the term 分别说部 could be used as a generic term to denote all the four categories. In such a situation of course the term would stand for both the genus as well as for one of its species. Although the possibility of such an interpretation cannot be completely ruled out its probability is very much doubtful. Even in the Buddhist texts where this fourfold classification occurs no indication is given in support of such an interpretation. 
In solving the problem why in the account of 第三次结集 the Buddha is represented as vibhajjavādī we may do well to focus our attention on the following facts: It will be observed that in this account the term vibhajjavādī is used in such a way as to distinguish the teaching of the Buddha from such theories as eternalism and annihilationism. The obvious implication is that more than any other term it brings into focus the essential nature of the Buddhas teaching, the distinctive characteristic of Buddhist thought. However, as Mrs Rhys Davids observes, it is rather surprising why this particular term was selected for this purpose when a term such as anattavādī (one who advocates non-self), or aniccavādī (one who advocates impermanence) could have served the same purpose in a better way.21 Besides, the selection of such a term would not give rise to the kind of problem which the use of the term vibhajjvādr has given rise to. We cannot certainly say that the authors of this account were not aware of the true import of this term either. What both these circumstances suggest is that there was an important historical reason for retaining the term. Behind the use of this term there seems to lie a nucleus of historical truth which is unwittingly expressed here. 

What this nucleus of historical truth is will become clear if we take into consideration the parallel data in the literary sources of other schools of Buddhist thought as well. In the 俱舍论, for instance, we read: “Those who maintain after having analysed that some things exist, namely the present and the past karma which has not borne its fruit and that some things do not exist, namely the past (karma) which has borne its fruit and the future are called Vibhajyavādins”.22 Here the reference is to the Buddhist doctrinal controversy on the tri-temporality of the dharmas and here the Vibhajyavādins are identified as Kāśyapīyas. As to the names of other Buddhist schools which came to be known as Vibhajyavādins, the texts differ. Among the names cited are Kāsyapīyas, Mahāsāṃghikas, Ekavyavahārikas, Lokottaravādins, Kaukkuṭikas, and Prajñaptivādins.23
In this connection Louis de La Vallée Poussin observes that in all probability the 上座部者, too, came to be known as Vibhajjavādins because of the position they took in respect of this self-same controversial issue.24 There is in fact much indirect evidence in the literary sources of the 上座部者 themselves which we propose to adduce in support of this conclusion.
As we have already noted in our 1st Chapter the 上座部者' response to the controversial issue is that only the dhammas in the present phase of time exist, whereas the dhammas in the past and future phases of time do not exist. This explanation, too, follows the vibhajjavāda method although of course it does not fall on all fours with that of the Kāśyapīyas. The similarity is only in the mode of ex-planation and not in the explanation itself. For here, too, there is neither unconditional assertion nor unconditional negation. While the existence of the dhammas in the present phase of time is as-serted, the existence of the dhammas in the past and future phases of time is negated. It is very likely therefore that it is in the context of this controversial issue that the 上座部者, too, came to be known as Vibhajjavādins.
Another question that we wish to raise here is whether the doctrinal controversy which we have been referring to served as the major factor that led to 第三次结集. According to its traditional account of course what led to the Council was a different state of affairs. It was the entry into the Saṅgha of members from other religious persuasions who proclaimed their own views as the Word of the Buddha which resulted in the postponement of the 布萨 ceremony for six consecutive years. With the intervention of King Asoka a purification of the sāsana was brought about at the end of which it was decided by the assembly of monks headed by the 目犍连子·帝须长老 to convene a Council. The discord within the Saṅgha which led to the intervention of king Asoka could be accepted as a historical fact, for the king himself alludes to it in his Minor Pillar Edicts of Sārnārh, Kausambi and Sāñci. What appears rather unlikely, however, is that it also led to 第三次结集. The traditional account of the Council, it appears to us, is a mix of both history and legend where we could detect a confusion between two events both of which are historically true. One is the Buddhist controversy on the tri-temporality of the dhammas, which, we believe, led to the summoning of the Council. The other is the disunity and the resulting state of turmoil within the Saṅgha which led to the intervention of King Asoka.
If, as suggested by its traditional account, the Council was summoned to refute the type of speculative views, such as eternalism and annihilationism which the non-Buddhist members within the Saṅgha put forward as the Word of the Buddha, then in the 论事, the treatise compiled at 第三次结集, we should expect a refutation of those self-same views. But what we get in this treatise instead is a formal refutation of views held by Buddhists other than the orthodox 上座部者. Besides, the arguments and the counter-arguments of the Buddhist sects involved in this doctrinal controversy are very well recorded in it, Its sixth chapter, “Does all exist” (sabbaṃ atthīti kathā), contains a refutation, from the 上座部 perspective, of the 说一切有部 theory and its eighth chapter, “Does some exist” (ekaccaṃ atthīti kathā), contains a refutation of the modified version of the theory held by the Kassapikas-Kaśyapīyas.
In point of fact, the very title (= 论事) of the treatise compiled at this Council is, either by accident or by design, reminds us of the Buddhist controversy on the tri-temporality of the dhammas. For in the Saṅgīti Suttanta of the Dīghanikāya we read that there are three kinds of 论事, topics of discussion, corresponding to the three divisions of time, the past, present and future.25 Since the treatise called 论事, too, deals, among others, with the existence or otherwise of the dhammas in the three divisions of time, one cannot fail to notice the resemblance it presents to the three kinds of kathāvatthu mentioned in the Pāli suttas.
An indication of the main event that led to 第三次结集 is also given in the Vijñānakāya of the 说一切有部's Abhidharma Piṭaka, whose authorship is attributed to Arahant Devaśarman. What interests us here is the fact that its first chapter is called Maudgalyāyana- skandhaka and as Louis de La Vallée Poussin observes it is extremely likely that the reference here is to the Elder Moggaliputta Tissa who is said to have convened 第三次结集.26 Why a chapter of a book belonging to the 说一切有部 should be named after a celebrated Elder of the 上座部者 is not far to seek. For what we get here is a criticism of the views expressed by the Elder Moggaliputta Tissa in rejecting the theory of tri-temporality. Thus the “Does all exist” of the 论事 and the Maudgalyāyana-skandhaka of Vijñānakāya represent the two opposite positions taken up by the 上座部者 and the 说一切有部 over an issue which separated them from each other in the 3rd century BCE.
One question often raised by historians who do not believe in the historicity of 第三次结集 is why no reference is made to it in any of the Edicts of King Asoka. According to our understanding of the situation, the question does not arise. For as we have already suggested, what in all likelihood led to the Council was the Buddhist controversy on the notion of tri-temporality of the dhammas, an issue which did not warrant the intervention of King Asoka. What is more unlikely than the temporal head of the State intervening in the settlement of a metaphysical problem the abstruse implications of which only the erudite monks would have understood? Even according to the traditional account of the Council it was not King Asoka but the assembly of monks headed by the 目犍连子·帝须长老 who decided to convene a Council after the purification of the sāsana by the intervention of King Asoka.
Another question often raised is why unlike the first two Councils the third does not find mention in the literary sources of the other schools of Buddhist thought. One observation made in this regard is that it was a “party meeting” confined to the 上座部者 and therefore it was ignored by others.27 If this were so, then even the first two Councils would not be much different from the third in the sense that we do not hear of a Buddhist Council participated by more than one school of Buddhist thought. As an answer to this question we would like to offer the following explanation.
If a number of Buddhist sects, or for that matter even if all of them, refer to the First Council it is because at the time it was held there were no Buddhist sects and hence we could expect it to be recorded by the Buddhist sects that emerged subsequently as an event connected with their own history, without being prevented from recording it by any sectarian feelings. Similarly all those Budd-hist sects which broke away from the 上座部 sometime after the Second Council could be expected to record it, because it was an event which took place before they branched off into different schools of Buddhist thought. But in the case of 第三次结集 the situation is somewhat different. For we are not aware of 上座部 undergoing a schism in India after 第三次结集. In point of fact, its history in India after its introduction to Sri Lanka is shrouded in mystery. For all what we know it was in Sri Lanka that the 上座部 split into three fraternities, the 大寺派, the 无畏山派 and the 祗陀林寺派. Now there is nothing to suggest that any of these fraternities doubted the historicity of 第三次结集, for they all could refer to it as part of their common history. In view of this situation which is peculiar to 第三次结集 one could understand why all information pertaining to it is confined to the literary sources of Sri Lanka's 上座部 tradition.
What we have observed so far is an attempt to explain why the 上座部 came to be known as 分别说部. In this connection it must also be mentioned here that contrary to what has been observed in some Pāli sub-commentaries there is sufficient evidence to suggest that the Pāli commentators were not unaware of the doctrinal context in which this term becomes meaningful as another expression for 上座部. Hence it is that in introducing the Buddhist doctrine of causality in the Visuddhimagea, Ācariya Buddhaghosa says that he will give a full exposition of it “by delving into the Vibhajjavādi-maṇḍala (the circle of the Vibhajjavādins)”.28 Since the rejection on the part of the 上座部者 of the 说一切有部 theory of tri-temporality has a direct relevance to the Buddhist doctrine of causality, it is nothing but proper that this fact should be taken into consideration in any exposition which seeks to bring out its true implications. This also explains why a similar idea finds expression in the colophon of the commentary to the Paṭṭhāna where we get the Abhidhamma doctrine of conditional relations.29
In concluding this appendix we would like to mention here that no other event in the history of Buddhist thought seems to have exerted so much influence on its subsequent history than the Buddhist doctrinal controversy which we have been referring to. At its very outset, as we saw, it precipitated a crisis within the Theravādin fraternity which not only led to the summoning of 第三次结集 but also resulted in the emergence of a new school of Buddhist thought called 说一切有部. It was again this controversy that occasioned the emergence, this time, from among the ranks of the 说一切有部 themselves of yet another school of Buddhist thought called Kāśyapīyas. What is called sarvam-asti-vāda or the “all-exists-theory” which came into vogue as a result of this controversy played a very decisive role in determining the history of Buddhist thought in the centuries that followed. In fact, among the post-Asokan Buddhist schools it became one of the hotly debated issues, resulting in a bewildering mass of arguments and counter-arguments which find mention in a host of literary works belonging to a number of Buddhist traditions. After the Buddhist Council said to be held in Jalandhara under the patronage of King Kaniṣka, the Vaibhaṣikas of Kāśmīr became the chief exponents of this theory. Its main critics were the 经量部. What provoked much opposition to this theory was that it was said to lead to some kind of substantialism which was radically at variance with the Buddhist teaching on the non-substantiality of all phenomena. A detailed statement of the theory, together with its critique on the part of the 经量部, is found in 世亲菩萨's 俱舍论. However, since his presentation of the subject was made against the background of its 经量部 criticism, it did not get a sympathetic response on the part of the 毗婆沙师. It was in order to meet 世亲菩萨's criticism of this and other subjects pertaining to the Vaibhāṣika Abhidharma that 众贤 composed his well-known treatise, the 顺正理论, a work which has come down to us only in its Chinese translation. Among the Mahāyānists it was mainly the Mādhyamikas who maintained a sustained criticism against the “all exists theory” of the 说一切有部. This is not to suggest that the 中观学派者 were in sympathy with the position taken up by the 上座部者 and the 经量部. For in their opinion the so called basic factors of empirical reality (dhammas/ dharmas) are not real even in the present phase of time.
